# minimally-invasive-procedure
Advantages of Minimally Invasive Surgery
The minimally invasive surgery has emerged as a safe alternative to traditional open surgeries, and has become the first preference of many doctors today. The minimally invasive surgery, introduced to the medical world in the 1980s, holds relatively fewer risks, and often fast tracks the recovery rate. These techniques are thus safer than the traditional methods and are all the more compelling.
What is a minimally invasive procedure?
In simple terms, the minimally invasive surgery revolves around operating the human body in a relatively safer way, having no harmful implications, with the assistance of modern surgical techniques and equipment. The chances of postoperative complications and risk factors reduce a lot because minimally invasive surgery involves no significant cuts and incisions. The traditional open surgery demands the doctors to make large slits and complete exposure of the area to be operated. This is done to ensure that the doctors can visualize the surgery area properly. On the other hand, all the surgeons need to make small incisions to fit cameras in the minimally invasive surgeries. Following that, they use other surgical tools to visualize the area they need to operate.
The most significant perk of minimally invasive surgery is that the patient's hospital stay's time duration reduces drastically. At the same time, the patient also shows signs of fast and swift recovery.
Types of minimally invasive surgery for orthopedic conditions:
By now, it is evident that minimally invasive surgery comes with several incredible advantages, which have helped it expand to the different status of medical fields. For orthopaedic injuries, there are several types of surgery options available for the doctor to choose the one that would best suit the patient's medical conditions.
We have combined below the most popular types of minimally invasive surgeries that are happening worldwide.
•	Arthroscopy:- For treating inflamed issues, bone spurs, tears and lesions, the surgeons take recourse to arthroscopy procedures. This invasive procedure is targeted mainly for the body parts like wrist, hip, knee, spine, elbow, shoulder, and foot.
•	Total Joint Replacement:- Originally the joint replacements were a part of the open surgery. However, thanks to medical science's enormous technological advancement, total knee, shoulder and hip replacements can be easily carried out through minimally invasive procedures.
•	Minimally invasive spine surgery:- This particular type of minimal techniques is targeted to identify and treat spinal conditions. A host of ailments including scoliosis, degenerative disc disease, spinal stenosis, herniated discs, nerve compression, and the like can be operated through minimally invasive spine surgery. The surgeons with the surgical tools can quickly stabilize the spine and eliminate the damaged tissues, spinal discs and the bone spurs that are pressing the spinal cord, and as a result, the patient suffers from extreme pain.
Advantages of minimally invasive surgeries
As noted in the early stanzas, there are many advantages and benefits of minimally invasive surgeries. In this section, we have elaborated all the help with brief descriptions and discussions. Keep on scrolling to learn of the incredible advantages and boons brought to us by the significant advancement in medical and health care studies.
•	Smaller incisions – In the traditional open surgeries, the doctors have to make large cuts – something which the minimally invasive surgeries don't demand. This is where the first difference is marked between traditional surgery techniques and minimally invasive methods. The modern technologies have made it accessible for the surgeons to make small slits near the affected area, and the insert cameras, tubes and small surgical tools. These fibre optic cameras help the surgeons to get a clear visualization of the area that they will operate.
•	Fewer complications – A small incision will not damage the surrounding organs, nerves, tendons, and soft tissues like the way a large cut would have done in traditional open surgeries. The surgeons can also carry out the operation without disturbing the muscles or cut through them to increase visibility. Most importantly, the minimally invasive surgery techniques pave the way for less blood flow during the ongoing surgery. This ultimately reduces the chances of complications during both the surgical phase and the post-surgery phase.
•	Less risk of infections – Most often, surgery leads to the growth and expansion of diseases in the affected area. Thanks to the minimally invasive techniques, the chances of postoperative infections have reduced to a considerable state. The reason for so is again the making of the smaller incisions. The risk of bacteria and viruses entering the body through the cut has decreased owing to the smaller incision. Thus, altogether, all these factors debar the growth of undesirable infections.
•	Reduced hospital stay – Forget a shorter hospital stay, some minimally invasive surgeries don't ask the patient to visit the hospital itself. Even if there is a need for the patient to be admitted in the hospital, he will need just an overnight stay. This reduces the overhead costs, making surgeries and operations all the more cost-efficient. This feature is, however, not applicable for patients who had to undergo traditional open surgeries.
•	Faster recovery rate – If patients can be released from the hospital after surgery within just a short period, you can realize how quick the recovery period is for people undergoing minimally invasive surgeries. Most patients can go back to their regular life schedule within a few days, and they have relatively fewer activity restrictions. The patients do not experience extreme postoperative pain and swelling. Most patients remain so fit and subtle that they don't need narcotic medications in the post-surgery phase, which is an additional benefit of the minimally invasive surgeries. Finally, the surgical scars are less in numbers, since the surgeons do not have to do many stitches.
Thus, we have covered almost all the necessary details regarding minimally invasive surgery - its types, advantages and facilities. There remains no confusion now why the first line of the article states minimally invasive surgery as a safe alternative to traditional open surgeries. No wonder, surgeons find the minimally invasive surgery better and superior!
[Advantages minimally invasive surgery.docx](https://github.com/fatimazarrin/minimally-invasive-procedure/files/11596768/Advantages.minimally.invasive.surgery.docx)
https://healthtrip.com/blog/advantages-of-minimally-invasive-surgery
